Australia, the smallest continent and one of the largest countries on Earth, lying between the Pacific and Indian oceans in the Southern Hemisphere. Australia’s capital is Canberra, located in the southeast between the larger and more important economic and cultural centres of Sydney and Melbourne.

The Australian mainland extends from west to east for nearly 2,500 miles (4,000 km) and from Cape York Peninsula in the northeast to Wilsons Promontory in the southeast for nearly 2,000 miles (3,200 km). To the south, Australian jurisdiction extends a further 310 miles (500 km) to the southern extremity of the island of Tasmania, and in the north it extends to the southern shores of Papua New Guinea. Australia is separated from Indonesia to the northwest by the Timor and Arafura seas, from Papua New Guinea to the northeast by the Coral Sea and the Torres Strait, from the Coral Sea Islands Territory by the Great Barrier Reef, from New Zealand to the southeast by the Tasman Sea, and from Antarctica in the far south by the Indian Ocean.

Australia
Australia
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Australia has been called “the Oldest Continent,” “the Last of Lands,” and “the Last Frontier.” Those descriptions typify the world’s fascination with Australia, but they are somewhat unsatisfactory. In simple physical terms, the age of much of the continent is certainly impressive—most of the rocks providing the foundation of Australian landforms were formed during Precambrian and Paleozoic time (some 4.6 billion to 252 million years ago)—but the ages of the cores of all the continents are approximately the same. On the other hand, whereas the landscape history of extensive areas in Europe and North America has been profoundly influenced by events and processes that occurred since late in the last Ice Age—roughly the past 25,000 years—in Australia scientists use a more extensive timescale that takes into account the great antiquity of the continent’s landscape.

00:26
03:02

Australia is the last of lands only in the sense that it was the last continent, apart from Antarctica, to be explored by Europeans. At least 60,000 years before European explorers sailed into the South Pacific, the first Aboriginal explorers had arrived from Asia, and by 20,000 years ago they had spread throughout the mainland and its chief island outlier, Tasmania. When Captain Arthur Phillip of the British Royal Navy landed with the First Fleet at Botany Bay in 1788, there may have been between 250,000 and 500,000 Aboriginals, though some estimates are much higher. Largely nomadic hunters and gatherers, the Aboriginals had already transformed the primeval landscape, principally by the use of fire, and, contrary to common European perceptions, they had established robust, semipermanent settlements in well-favoured localities.

Get exclusive access to content from our 1768 First Edition with your subscription.
Subscribe today
The American-style concept of a national “frontier” moving outward along a line of settlement is also inappropriate. There was, rather, a series of comparatively independent expansions from the margins of the various colonies, which were not joined in an independent federated union until 1901. Frontier metaphors were long employed to suggest the existence of yet another extension of Europe and especially of an outpost of Anglo-Celtic culture in the distant “antipodes.”

Dove Lake, Tasmania Australia
Dove Lake, Tasmania Australia
Dove Lake in Cradle Mountain–Lake St. Clair National Park, Tasmania, Australia.
© keiichihiki—iStock/Getty Images

The most striking characteristics of the vast country are its global isolation, its low relief, and the aridity of much of its surface. If, like the English novelist D.H. Lawrence, visitors from the Northern Hemisphere are at first overwhelmed by “the vast, uninhabited land and by the grey charred bush…so phantom-like, so ghostly, with its tall, pale trees and many dead trees, like corpses,” they should remember that to Australians the bush—that sparsely populated Inland or Outback beyond the Great Dividing Range of mountains running along the Pacific coast and separating it from the cities in the east—is familiar and evokes nostalgia. It still retains some of the mystical quality it had for the first explorers searching for inland seas and great rivers, and it remains a symbol of Australia’s strength and independence; the Outback poem by A.B. (“Banjo”) Paterson, “Waltzing Matilda,” is the unofficial national anthem of Australia known the world over.

Australia’s isolation from other continents explains much of the singularity of its plant and animal life. Its unique flora and fauna include hundreds of kinds of eucalyptus trees and the only egg-laying mammals on Earth, the platypus and echidna. Other plants and animals associated with Australia are various acacias (Acacia pycnantha [golden wattle] is the national flower) and dingoes, kangaroos, koalas, and kookaburras. The Great Barrier Reef, off the east coast of Queensland, is the greatest mass of coral in the world and one of the world’s foremost tourist attractions. The country’s low relief results from the long and extensive erosive action of the forces of wind, rain, and the heat of the sun during the great periods of geologic time when the continental mass was elevated well above sea level.

Great Barrier Reef, off the coast of Queensland, Australia
Great Barrier Reef, off the coast of Queensland, Australia
The Great Barrier Reef, off the coast of Queensland, Australia.
© tororo reaction/Fotolia
Isolation is also a pronounced characteristic of much of the social landscape beyond the large coastal cities. But an equally significant feature of modern Australian society is the representation of a broad spectrum of cultures drawn from many lands, a development stemming from immigration that is transforming the strong Anglo-Celtic orientation of Australian culture. Assimilation, of course, is seldom a quick and easy process, and minority rights, multiculturalism, and race-related issues have played a large part in contemporary Australian politics. In the late 1990s these issues sparked a conservative backlash.

Advertisement

Australia has a federal form of government, with a national government for the Commonwealth of Australia and individual state governments (those of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania). Each state has a constitution, and its government exercises a limited degree of sovereignty. There are also two internal territories: Northern Territory, established as a self-governing territory in 1978, and the Australian Capital Territory (including the city of Canberra), which attained self-governing status in 1988. The federal authorities govern the external territories of Norfolk Island, the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Christmas Island, Ashmore and Cartier islands, the Coral Sea Islands, and Heard Island and McDonald Islands and claim the Australian Antarctic Territory, an area larger than Australia itself. Papua New Guinea, formerly an Australian external territory, gained its independence in 1975.

Historically part of the British Empire and now a member of the Commonwealth, Australia is a relatively prosperous independent country. Australians are in many respects fortunate in that they do not share their continent—which is only a little smaller than the United States—with any other country. Extremely remote from their traditional allies and trading partners—it is some 12,000 miles (19,000 km) from Australia to Great Britain via the Indian Ocean and the Suez Canal and about 7,000 miles (11,000 km) across the Pacific Ocean to the west coast of the United States—Australians have become more interested in the proximity of huge potential markets in Asia and in the highly competitive industrialized economies of China, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. Australia, the continent and the country, may have been quite isolated at the beginning of the 20th century, but it entered the 21st century a culturally diverse land brimming with confidence, an attitude encouraged by the worldwide fascination with the land “Down Under” and demonstrated when Sydney hosted the 2000 Olympic Games.


Subscribe Today!

Australia
Australia
flag of Australia
“Advance Australia Fair”
Advance Australia Fair
OFFICIAL NAME
Commonwealth of Australia
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
federal parliamentary state (formally a constitutional monarchy) with two legislative houses (Senate [76]; House of Representatives [150])
HEAD OF STATE
British Monarch: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by Governor-General: David Hurley
HEAD OF GOVERNMENT
Prime Minister: Scott Morrison
CAPITAL
Canberra
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
none1
OFFICIAL RELIGION
none
MONETARY UNIT
Australian dollar ($A)
CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATE
1 USD equals 1.462 Australian dollar
POPULATION
(2019 est.) 25,879,000
POPULATION RANK
(2018) 53
POPULATION PROJECTION 2030
27,564,000
TOTAL AREA (SQ MI)
2,969,976
TOTAL AREA (SQ KM)
7,692,202
DENSITY: PERSONS PER SQ MI
(2018) 8.1
DENSITY: PERSONS PER SQ KM
(2018) 3.1
URBAN-RURAL POPULATION
Urban: (2018) 86%
Rural: (2018) 14%
LIFE EXPECTANCY AT BIRTH
Male: (2014–2016) 80.4 years
Female: (2014–2016) 84.6 years
LITERACY: PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION AGE 15 AND OVER LITERATE
Male: not available
Female: not available
GNI (U.S.$ ’000,000)
(2017) 1,263,489
GNI PER CAPITA (U.S.$)
(2017) 51,360
1There is no official language designated in the Australian constitution. English is widely considered the de facto national language.


Geologic History
The earliest known manifestations of the geologic record of the Australian continent are 4.4-billion-year-old detrital grains of zircon in metasedimentary rocks that were deposited from 3.7 to 3.3 billion years ago. Based on that and other findings, the Precambrian rocks in Australia have been determined to range in age from about 3.7 billion to 541 million years (i.e., to the end of Precambrian time). They are succeeded by rocks of the Paleozoic Era, which extended to about 252 million years ago; of the Mesozoic Era, which lasted until about 66 million years ago; and of the Cenozoic Era, the past 66 million years.

For millions of years Australia was part of the supercontinent of Pangaea and subsequently its southern segment, Gondwanaland (or Gondwana). Its separate existence was finally assured by the severing of the last connection between Tasmania and Antarctica, but it has been drifting toward the Southeast Asian landmass. As a continent, Australia thus encompasses two extremes: on the one hand, it contains the oldest known earth material while, on the other, it has stood as a free continent only since about 35 million years ago and is in the process—in terms of geologic time—of merging with Asia, so that its life span as a continent will be of relatively short duration. (See also geochronology: Geologic history of the Earth.)

General considerations
Tectonic framework
The map of the structural features of Australia and the surrounding region shows the distribution of the main tectonic units. The primary distinction is between the plates of oceanic lithosphere, generated within the past 160 million years by seafloor spreading at the oceanic ridges, and the continental lithosphere, accumulated over the past 4 billion years. (The lithosphere is the outer rock shell of the Earth that consists of the crust and the uppermost portion of the underlying mantle; see plate tectonics.) The largest area of oldest rocks is the Western Shield, comprising the western half of the continent, which has been eroded to a low relief. The youngest rocks are found in the growing fold belt of the Banda arcs and in New Guinea at the boundary between the Indian-Australian plate and the Eurasian and Pacific plates. The modern fold belts are separated from Australia by a “moat” (the Timor Trough) and a wide shelf (the Timor and Arafura seas). The northern half of the Australian margin is completed by the North West Shelf and the Exmouth Plateau on the west and by the Great Barrier Reef and the Queensland Plateau on the east.

MacDonnell Ranges, Northern Territory, Australia
MacDonnell Ranges, Northern Territory, Australia
MacDonnell Ranges, Northern Territory, Australia.
http://www.touristmaker.com/australia/northern-territory/

Precambrian rocks occupy three tectonic environments. The first is in shields, such as the Yilgarn and Pilbara blocks of the Western Shield, enclosed by later orogenic (mountain) belts. The second is as the basement to a younger cover of Phanerozoic sediment (deposited during the past 541 million years); for example, all the sedimentary basins west of the Tasman Line are underlain by Precambrian basement. The third is as relicts in younger orogenic belts, as in the Georgetown Inlier of northern Queensland and in the western half of Tasmania. Rocks of Paleozoic age occur either in flat-lying sedimentary basins, such as the Canning Basin, or within belts, such as the east–west-trending Amadeus Transverse Zone and north-trending Tasman Fold Belt.

Cradle Mountain, Tasmania, Australia
Cradle Mountain, Tasmania, Australia
Cradle Mountain, Tasmania, Australia.
© Vonviper/Dreamstime.com
Mesozoic and Cenozoic rocks occur in widely distributed (though poorly exposed) basins onshore (the Great Artesian Basin in the eastern centre). Offshore they occur on the western, southern, and eastern margins, including beneath Bass Strait, which separates Australia from Tasmania, and to the north in the submerged ground between the Banda arcs/New Guinea and the mainland.


Chronological summary
The geologic development may be summarized as follows. Archean rocks (those more than 2.5 billion years old) crop out within the two-thirds of Australia that lies west of the Tasman Line. Individual blocks of Archean rocks became embedded in Proterozoic fold belts (those from about 2.5 billion to 541 million years old) to form a mosaic. The lines of weakness within the mosaic later guided stresses that pulled the blocks apart or pushed them together. The Proterozoic fold belts that bounded the western and southern sides of the Archean Yilgarn block, for example, became the sites of the continental margin during seafloor spreading in the Mesozoic, and the fold belts of the Amadeus Transverse Zone in central Australia guided the overthrusting of blocks in the north over those in the south during the late Paleozoic.

Proterozoic Australia was part of the supercontinent of Gondwanaland, comprising India and the other southern continents, from about 750 million years ago. At the beginning of the Paleozoic, some 541 million years ago, pieces began to flake off the Australian portion of Gondwanaland when ocean basins opened around its periphery. Off the northwest, an ancient forebear of the Indian Ocean, called the Tethys, transferred continental terranes (fault-bounded fragments of the crust) from Gondwanaland to Asia; later generations of that ocean rifted material northward, including the biggest and latest terrane of India. Off the east, an ancient Pacific Ocean opened and closed in the first of a series of back-arc basins or marginal seas that persists to the present.

The structure of Australia was determined by the following: the processes that welded the Archean blocks and Proterozoic fold belts into a mosaic; the lithospheric plate processes that acted on that mosaic along lines of weakness to form ocean basins by spreading along the western and southern margins; and the processes that accompanied the convergence of the Pacific Plate, including alternating back-arc spreading and subduction that accreted the eastern third of Australia during the Phanerozoic. Australia ultimately became isolated from its Gondwanaland neighbours India and Antarctica by seafloor spreading. It was isolated from Lord Howe Rise/New Zealand by back-arc spreading that began in the Mesozoic. Today, Australia is drifting northward from Antarctica as a result of seafloor spreading in the southeast Indian Ocean and, consequently, is colliding with the westward-moving Pacific Plate to form the strike-slip ranges of New Guinea and the S-shaped fold of the Banda arcs.


Subscribe Today!

MORE ABOUT THIS TOPIC
Education: Australia and New Zealand
Education: Australia
History of the motion picture: Australia
History of the motion picture: Australia, New Zealand, and Canada
Western theatre: Australia, New Zealand, and Canada
Oceanic art and architecture: Australia
Oceanic art and architecture: Australia
English language: Australian and New Zealand English
Wine: Australia
Cricket: Australia


Stratigraphy and structure
The Precambrian
This major period of geologic time can be subdivided into the older Archean and the younger Proterozoic eons, the time boundary between them being some 2.5 billion years ago. In Australia the main outcrop of the Archean and older Proterozoic rocks is in the Yilgarn and Pilbara blocks of the southwest and northwest, respectively.

Hamersley Range, Western Australia
Hamersley Range, Western Australia
Hamersley Range in the Pilbara region of the Australian Shield, in Western Australia.
Richard Woldendorp/Photo Index
In the Yilgarn block the oldest known rocks are sialic crust (i.e., composed of rocks rich in silica and alumina) that developed in the Narryer Gneiss Complex between 4.3 and 3.7 billion years ago. The older end of that time span is provided by detrital zircon grains found in younger metasedimentary rock (metamorphosed sedimentary rock) some 3.3 to 3.7 billion years old: as determined by ion microprobe analysis, the grains are 4.2 to 4.3 billion years old. A zircon grain imbedded in 3.75-billion-year-old metamorphosed sediment from Jack Hills in Western Australia was found to be even older, 4.4 billion years, and it is thus the oldest dated material on Earth. The younger end of 3.7 billion years ago is provided by samarium-neodymium (Sm-Nd) isotopic analyses of anorthosite and gabbro and more extensive granitic rocks. Subsequent to such igneous rocks being formed, siliceous sedimentary rocks were deposited during an interval of subdued relief and extensive sheets of vein quartz pebbles were concentrated on the surface.

The oldest rocks in the Pilbara block to the north make up a granite-greenstone terrane and so differ distinctly from those of the Yilgarn block. They are mostly 3.3 to 3.5 billion years old and comprise basic (alkaline) volcanics associated with horizontal tabular igneous bodies known as sills and layered intrusions, as well as acid volcanics associated with granitic plutons (bodies of deep-seated intrusive igneous rock) and sheets. The association of basic and acid rocks suggests the possibility that older sialic crust melted. Chert within basalt 3.5 billion years old at the North Pole mining centre in Western Australia contains stromatolites (layered deposits formed by the growth of cyanobacteria) and filamentous colonial microfossils that are among the oldest known sets of fossils on Earth. Between 3.05 and 2.9 billion years ago, thick acid and basic volcanics and sedimentary rocks were intruded by large granite plutons and deformed and metamorphosed to establish the internal form of the Pilbara block. Between 2.8 and 2.7 billion years ago, the beveled surface of the Pilbara block was blanketed by basaltic lava. Finally, between 2.55 to 2.4 billion years ago, banded-iron formation, dolomite, shale, and minor acid-volcanic rocks were intruded by sills of porphyry. Iron ores of hematite and goethite have been formed by supergene enrichment of banded-iron formation.


The Yilgarn block became an internally coherent mass only after greenstone and associated granitic terrane had developed from 3.0 to 2.5 billion years ago, and it was then intruded by a swarm of vertical tabular bodies called dikes composed of dolerite. Mafic and ultramafic rocks (those composed primarily of ferromagnesian—dark-coloured—minerals) 2.7 billion years old within the granite-greenstone terrane are the chief host of the epigenetic gold deposits of Western Australia. Slightly older (2.8 billion years) volcanic ultramafic rocks contain deposits of nickel sulfide.

The Pilbara and Yilgarn blocks were joined between 2.0 to 1.8 billion years ago along a belt of deformed continental-margin deposits. Later in the Proterozoic, between 1.6 billion and 650 million years ago, mountain belts resulting from the collision of continental terranes were repeatedly worn down and overlain by sedimentary rocks. That view contrasts with another interpretation that regards most of the western part of Australia as intact since Archean times and considers that most later orogenic activity was ensialic.


The development of the late Proterozoic Adelaidean province, the other Precambrian succession to be described here, was within a sialic basement. The Adelaidean succession crops out in the region of South Australia between Adelaide and the Flinders Ranges and contains an almost complete sedimentary record of the late Proterozoic. The early Adelaidean Callanna and Burra groups are confined to troughs faulted down into basement. A sheet of sedimentary deposits at the base of the Callanna group was cut by faults into rift valleys that filled with basic volcanic rocks and evaporitic sediment and carbonate rock. The succeeding Burra group comprises fluvial sediment followed by shallow marine carbonate.

The late Adelaidean Umberatana and Wilpena groups unconformably succeed older rocks. The Umberatana group contains a rich record of two glaciations: the older Sturtian glaciation is indicated by glaciomarine diamictites deposited on a shallow shelf and at the bottom of newly rifted troughs; the younger Marinoan glaciation is represented by diamictites deposited on the basin floor and sandstone on the shelf. The Wilpena group comprises extensive sheets of interbedded sandstone, siltstone, and shale deposited during two marine transgressions, during the second of which deep canyons were cut and filled. The uppermost part of the Wilpena group, in the latest Proterozoic, contains the celebrated Ediacara assemblage of the oldest well-known animal fossils.

The Precambrian rocks of Australia provide a rich source of economically important minerals, such as the above-mentioned major iron ore deposits of the Pilbara block and the gold and nickel deposits of the Yilgarn block. Other minerals include diamonds from the Argyle diatreme (vertical volcanic conduit filled with breccia) in northern Western Australia. Lead and zinc are found at Broken Hill in western New South Wales, and lead, zinc, and copper occur at Mount Isa in northwestern Queensland and at Olympic Dam in South Australia.

The Paleozoic Era
Phanerozoic Australia is divided at the Tasman Line into two parts. Those are a western terrane of exposed Precambrian blocks and fold belts overlain by thin Phanerozoic basins and an eastern terrane of exposed Phanerozoic fold belts and basins.

Principal regimes
During Phanerozoic times, Australia has been marked by three regimes: Uluru (541 to 320 million years ago), Innamincka (320 to 97 million years ago), and Potoroo (the past 97 million years). Each regime, a complex of uniform plate-tectonic and paleoclimatic events at a similar or slowly changing latitude, generated a depositional sequence of distinct facies separated by gaps in deposition.

Cobar, New South Wales, Australia
Cobar, New South Wales, Australia
Mine in Cobar, New South Wales, Australia.
Axel Strauss
The Paleozoic Era (about 541 to 252 million years ago) opened in Australia with the breakup of the Precambrian continent along the Tasman Line and the initial generation of the floor of the Paleo Pacific Ocean by seafloor spreading. In the Adelaide area, wedges of deepwater quartzose sediment advanced over the newly formed seafloor. On the northwestern side of Australia, widespread basalt erupted over the Precambrian platform, possibly during the initial generation of the Paleo Tethyan Sea, and was succeeded by deposition of shallow marine limestone with abundant fossil trilobites and archeocyathids. The initial Paleo Pacific marginal seafloor was subducted—i.e., forced under the edge of a converging plate into the hot mantle—at the end of the Cambrian Period (485 million years ago); concomitant deformation and granitic intrusion of the overlying deepwater sediments and those of the adjacent Adelaidean region formed the Delamerian fold belt. A similar cycle of marginal sea generation and subsequent Mariana-type subduction (within oceanic lithosphere) accreted a second fold belt to eastern Australia during the Ordovician Period (about 485 to 444 million years ago). That was followed by an interval of block faulting and widespread granitic intrusion in eastern Australia that produced a landscape similar to the present Basin and Range Province of the western United States; by the late Devonian Period (about 385 million years ago) the first of a series of magmatic orogenic arcs had become established by Chilean-type subduction (of oceanic lithosphere beneath continental lithosphere) on the eastern margin, and a thick succession of mainly sandstone and shale accumulated in the moatlike foreland basin between the mountain belt and the craton—the flat and relatively stable interior portion of the continent. At the same time, local uplifts in central Australia shed gravels into the Amadeus Basin. By the mid-Carboniferous Period (320 million years ago), central Australia was deformed by folding and thrusting along east-west axes, and eastern Australia was deformed by folding along north-south axes and a subsequent granitoid intrusion that consolidated the Lachlan and Thomson fold belts in an epoch of deformation that concluded the Uluru regime.

Australia had moved to higher latitudes so that the alpine uplands that followed the deformation were covered by the nucleus of a continental ice sheet. Only the highest peaks stood prominently above the surface of the ice in the form of nunataks, and the little sediment available was carried off the continent in ice streams. The melting of the ice sheet early in the Permian Period (i.e., about 290 million years ago) released the sediment into the newly subsiding basins of the Innamincka regime. Much of interior Australia was covered by broad basins. The eastern margin between the New England Fold Belt and the craton became a second foreland basin in which the rich seams of black coal in the Bowen Basin of Queensland and the Sydney Basin of New South Wales were deposited during the final 10 million years of the Paleozoic Era. Other economic resources in Paleozoic rocks are the reef gold in Victoria that triggered the first mining boom, lead and zinc at Cobar and Woodlawn in New South Wales, and natural gas in Permian sandstone in the Cooper Basin of South Australia.

Terranes of the Tasman Fold Belt
The various parts of the Tasman Fold Belt are separated from each other by faults or have boundaries covered by sediment. Geologists have reviewed the Paleozoic development of the Tasman Fold Belt in light of the observation that the component terranes of many other circum-Pacific fold belts are displaced to a greater or lesser extent from their place of origin. In the Tasman Fold Belt, uncertainty remains about the exact paleotectonic and paleogeographic settings and relationships of the identified terranes and the craton and between the terranes themselves during most of Paleozoic time. Much effort is being applied to paleomagnetic determinations of elevation levels at the time and to studies of the provenance and facies of sedimentary successions within the terranes in an attempt to ascertain their original locations.

Subscribe Today!



The Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras
The coal measures of the Permian gave way to barren red beds in the early part of the Triassic Period (about 252 to 247 million years ago). By 230 million years ago the foreland basin of eastern Australia had been overthrusted by the mountain belt, and a second epoch of black-coal formation opened in eastern Australia (southeastern Queensland and Tasmania) and in South Australia (Leigh Creek). Another foreland basin became established behind the magmatic arc along the eastern margin, and a set of basins, including the Great Artesian Basin, subsided over the east-central part of Australia. Thick sand was deposited over the area of rifting that became the western and northwestern margins of Australia as Gondwanaland was breaking up and seafloor spreading was beginning in the northwest during the Late Jurassic (about 164 to 145 million years ago) and in the west during the Early Cretaceous (about 145 to 100 million years ago). Subsequent burial of the sand by sediment of late Mesozoic and Cenozoic age (about 66 million years old or younger) generated the giant natural gas field at Rankin on the North West Shelf. Rifting between Australia and Antarctica started in the Late Jurassic and culminated with the separation of the continents and the beginning of (very slow) seafloor spreading in the Late Cretaceous (about 100 to 66 million years ago). The other momentous event at that time took place in eastern Australia. The shallow sea that had covered nearly half of Australia during the Early Cretaceous retreated when the long-enduring Chilean-type subduction off eastern Australia was replaced by Mariana-type subduction and back-arc spreading in the Southwest Pacific Ocean that carried New Zealand and the submarine Lord Howe Rise away from Australia.

Glass House Mountains, Queensland, Australia
Glass House Mountains, Queensland, Australia
Glass House Mountains near Maleny, Queensland, Australia.
© Dale Lorna Jacobsen/Shutterstock.com
World Data Locator Map: Australia
BRITANNICA DEMYSTIFIED
Is Australia an Island?
What’s the difference between an island and a continent anyway?
All those events marked the change from the Innamincka Regime to the Potoroo Regime and the inception of modern Australia, with its oceanic margins on all sides and uplands on the eastern margin dividing the continental drainage into short coastal rivers to the east and the long ancestral Murray and Darling rivers to the southwest. Gold-bearing sand in rivers within the highlands was covered from time to time during the Cenozoic by flows of basalt lava. Other river sands deposited in the Paleocene and Eocene epochs (66 to 34 million years ago) at the foot of the ancestral Eastern Highlands of Victoria were later shaped into broad folds to become the reservoirs of the giant oil and gas fields in the offshore Gippsland Basin. Australia continued moving away from Antarctica owing to seafloor spreading of the southeast Indian Ocean. By the beginning of the Oligocene Epoch (about 34 million years ago) the ocean was wide enough to allow the unimpeded flow of the Circum-Antarctic Current, which led to the glaciation of Antarctica by insulating it from the rest of the world ocean.

Australia meanwhile had drifted to lower latitudes, and the northern half of the Australian margin, including the southern part of New Guinea, became covered in warm-water carbonate sediment, though it was not until sometime in the Quaternary Period (the past 2.6 million years) that the Great Barrier Reef off the Queensland coast began to grow. In its northern progress over the Pacific Plate since about 25 million years ago, the leading edge of Australia picked up slivers of the continental and oceanic terranes that now form the northern half of New Guinea. Within the past few million years, Australia has collided in Timor with the Banda arcs. As Australia continues to move northward, it will ultimately join Eurasia by colliding with continental Southeast Asia, as did India, its former neighbour in Gondwanaland, some 50 million years ago.


The Quaternary Period
The Pleistocene Epoch occupies most of the Quaternary Period, with the exception of the past 11,700 years (i.e., the Holocene Epoch). The northern leading edges of the continental plate in New Guinea and Timor rise to peaks of 2 miles (3 km) or more and are separated from mainland Australia by the flooded continental area of the Arafura and Timor seas. On the mainland, the Central-Eastern Lowlands extend from the Gulf of Carpentaria through Lake Eyre, some 50 feet (15 metres) below sea level, to the Spencer and St. Vincent gulfs near Adelaide. The Lowlands are bounded on the west by the Great Western Plateau—great in extent but not height: the highest point (in the Pilbara) is 4,105 feet (1,251 metres)—and on the east by the Eastern Highlands, whose highest point (at Mount Kosciuszko) is 7,310 feet (2,228 metres). Inside a coastal region in the north, east, and southwest that is about 620 miles (1,000 km) wide, the arid interior lacks coherent drainage, and much of it consists of dune fields and sand plains covered by sparse vegetation in what is now the hottest and (after Antarctica) the driest continent. In the southeast, Tasmania represents the southernmost part of the Eastern Highlands beyond the flooded Bass Strait.

King Leopold Ranges, Western Australia
King Leopold Ranges, Western Australia
King Leopold Ranges in the Kimberley region of Western Australia.
Richard Woldendorp/Photo Index
The Holocene is the latest of several interglacial phases within the Quaternary ice age. During the peak of the latest glacial phase, 18,000 years ago, the global sea level was some 300 feet (90 metres) lower than it is today, and New Guinea and Tasmania were joined by dry land to the mainland. The arid zone was even wider than it is at present: summers were dry, hot, and windy; sand was moved about in dunes and sheets; and dust was blown out to sea. Ice built up in Tasmania and the Mount Kosciuszko region. Giant forebears of the Holocene marsupial animals became extinct, but humans survived as they had for the previous 20,000 years.


Economic resources
Major economic resources generated during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic include the oil and natural gas of the North West Shelf and offshore Gippsland; the brown coal of onshore Gippsland; the oil shale of Queensland; the black coal of Queensland, Tasmania, and South Australia; the bauxite of northern Australia; and, particularly valuable in arid Australia, extensive groundwater reservoirs, notably those of the Great Artesian Basin.

The modern geologic framework
The surface of Australia reflects the longevity of its landforms. The Eastern Highlands, strictly speaking a low plateau, rose 90 million years ago, probably as a result of the breakup of Lord Howe Rise/New Zealand. Parts of the Great Western Plateau rose even earlier in the Paleozoic. Individual monoliths on the plateau, such as those found in the Olgas and Uluru/Ayers Rock (Aboriginal name: Uluru), date from at least 60 million years ago. As a result of low exposure and slow erosion, the bedrock of the interior is deeply weathered with crusts of ironstone and silica that originated earlier in the Cenozoic when conditions differed from those of today. In areas with sufficient groundwater, the hard conditions imposed by soil and climate have been turned to advantage in the production of fine wool. The riverine plains of southeastern Australia, inherited from former sea and lake basins, have been made fertile by carefully managed irrigation. The only young landscapes are in the Holocene volcanic areas of Victoria and northern Queensland.

Uluru/Ayers Rock, Northern Territory, Australia
Uluru/Ayers Rock, Northern Territory, Australia
The northwestern face of Uluru/Ayers Rock, southwestern Northern Territory, central Australia.
© Goodshoot/Jupiterimages
Pangaean supercycle
The Phanerozoic development of Australia (and the rest of the Earth) was overshadowed by the changing configuration of the continents. The enormous continental blocks amalgamated into a supercontinent—the so-called Proto-Pangaea—by the end of the Precambrian and then split apart in the early Paleozoic. The landmasses reassembled to form Pangaea between the late Carboniferous (about 315 million years ago) and the Late Jurassic (150 million years ago), after which they began (and have continued) to disperse again. Attending the clustering of the continents in Pangaea were the tectonic effect of reduced turnover of mantle material and the environmental effects of low global sea level, a low concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide, and, through the correspondingly weak greenhouse effect, low retention of heat from the Sun. As a result, Pangaea was prone to glaciation, exemplified by the global glaciations near the end of the Proterozoic (in Australia, the Marinoan glaciation) and Permian (the deposits at the onset of the Innamincka Regime).

The reverse effects are known to occur during the alternate configuration of dispersed continents: the plate-tectonic “motor” turns faster, new rift oceans drive the continental fragments apart, sea level is high and the continents flooded, and a high concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide vented from the mantle retains radiant heat from the Sun. The result is that the continents are prone to be covered by the sea (Australia was flooded during the Cambrian and Ordovician between Proto-Pangaea and Pangaea, and after Pangaea in the Cretaceous) and tend to be warm (even though Australia was located at high latitudes in the Mesozoic, there is no evidence of permanent ice having existed on the continent at that time). It is the Pangaea factor that explains the association of tectonic and environmental effects that characterize the tectonic-climatic regimes of Phanerozoic Australia. Accordingly, the Uluru sequence in the interior is dominated by warm marine carbonate deposits, the Innamincka sequence by nonmarine (including glacial) deposits, and the Potoroo sequence by marine deposits confined almost wholly to the margins.

John J. Veevers
Subscribe Today!



Land
Australia is both the flattest continent and, except for Antarctica, the driest. Seen from the air, its vast plains, sometimes the colour of dried blood, more often tawny like a lion’s skin, may seem to be one huge desert. One can fly the roughly 2,000 miles (3,200 km) to Sydney from Darwin in the north or to Sydney from Perth in the west without seeing a town or anything but the most scattered and minute signs of human habitation for vast stretches. A good deal of the central depression and western plateau is indeed desert. Yet appearances can be deceptive. The red and black soil plains of Queensland and New South Wales have long supported the world’s greatest wool industry, and some of the most arid and forbidding areas of Australia conceal great mineral wealth.

Australia: physical features
Australia: physical features
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
High detailed Australia physical map with labeling.
BRITANNICA QUIZ
Australian Government and Political System
The lower house of the Australian Parliament is known as the…
Moreover, the coastal rim is, almost everywhere, exempted from the prevailing flatness and aridity. In particular the east coast, where European settlement began and where the majority of Australians now live, is topographically quite diverse and is comparatively well watered and fertile.

Inland from the coast runs a chain of highlands, known as the Great Dividing Range, from Cape York in northern Queensland to the southern seaboard of Tasmania. From the coast that range, which may be anything from 20 miles to 200 miles (30 to 300 km) distant, often appears as a bold range of mountains, though few of its peaks exceed 5,000 feet (1,500 metres). In fact, it is more like the escarpment of a giant plateau, formed of gently rolling hills, which slopes imperceptibly down to the western plains. There are similar, though smaller, stretches of hilly, well-watered land all around the rim of the continent except on the south coast where the Nullarbor Plain stretches to the sea, but everywhere precipitation diminishes rapidly as one penetrates farther from the coast.

Three Sisters, Blue Mountains, New South Wales, Australia
Three Sisters, Blue Mountains, New South Wales, Australia
Three Sisters in the Blue Mountains, New South Wales, Australia.
David Johnson

In such a huge continent there are wide variations in landforms and climate. The thickly wooded ranges of the Great Divide have little in common with the treeless, sun-baked plains of the Inland. There is a vast difference between the red rocks and monumental hills of central Australia and the tropical rainforests and sugar plantations of northern Queensland. To many visitors, Australia may not seem a pretty country, but it has a unique and haunting beauty that exerts a powerful fascination on those who get to know it.

The Australian Heritage Commission Act of 1975 established a federal agency to develop interest in a National Estate of listed places. Such places would be selected mainly on the basis of aesthetic, historical, scientific, or social significance. The process was not intended to guarantee any area or site against development, but the growing register was, nevertheless, made to serve that purpose on occasion. The UNESCO list of World Heritage sites carries more political and legal weight, and areas so classified have been protected by the federal governments in the face of furious opposition from their state partners. Some 20 Australian landmarks, representing every state and territory, have been added to the list, including the Great Barrier Reef, the Blue Mountains area, Kakadu National Park, Shark Bay, Uluru–Kata Tjuta National Park (which contains the great red mass of Uluru/Ayers Rock, a sacred site of Aboriginal peoples), rainforest reserves in central-eastern Australia, the Tasmanian Wilderness, and fossil mammal sites at Riversleigh and Naracoorte. Territorial disputes have arisen over proposals for the Great Barrier Reef and natural rainforest enclaves in Queensland and Tasmania.

fish in the Great Barrier Reef, off the coast of Queensland, Australia
fish in the Great Barrier Reef, off the coast of Queensland, Australia
School of fish in the Great Barrier Reef, off the coast of Queensland, Australia.
© StrangerView/Fotolia

Relief and drainage
Overall characteristics
Australia is a land of vast plains. Only 6 percent of the island continent is above 2,000 feet (600 metres) in elevation. Its highest peak, Mount Kosciuszko, rises to only 7,310 feet (2,228 metres). That situation stems in part from the long periods of geologic time during which Australia has been subject to weathering and erosion and in part from Australia’s position at the edge of a zone of significant and geologically recent earth movement.

Australia: physiographic regions
Australia: physiographic regions
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Patterns of faulting and folding in large measure control the distribution and attitude of rocks and thus play a significant part in determining the shape of the land surface. But the nature and intensity of the processes at work at and near the land surface also give rise to characteristic assemblages of forms. Australia is an arid continent; fully one-third of its area is occupied by desert, another third is steppe or semidesert, and only in the north, east, southeast, and southwest is precipitation adequate to support vegetation that significantly protects the land surface from weathering.

the Pinnacles, Western Australia
the Pinnacles, Western Australia
The Pinnacles, limestone formations in Nambung National Park, in Western Australia.
© Alexander/Fotolia
Permanently flowing rivers are found only in the eastern and southwestern regions and in Tasmania. The major exception is the Murray River, a stream that rises in the Mount Kosciuszko area in the Eastern Uplands and is fed by melting snows. As a result, it acquires a volume sufficient to survive the passage across the arid and semiarid plains that bear its name and to reach the Southern Ocean southeast of Adelaide. (In Australia, the southern portions of the Pacific and Indian oceans surrounding Antarctica are called the Southern Ocean; that body of water is also known as the Antarctic Ocean.) All other rivers in Australia are seasonal or intermittent in their flow, and those of the arid interior are episodic.

Many areas—notably the Nullarbor Plain, which is underlain by limestone, and the sand ridge deserts—are without surface drainage, but there are underground streams. A map of Australia can be misleading; though many “lakes” are depicted in the interior, the fact is that many of them are now salt lakes that contain no water for years on end.